The Great Pyramids of Giza, rank among the
oldest monuments of Egyptian architecture,
and they’re even among the oldest
buildings still preserved today.
They were built within the necropolis
of the ancient capital city of Memphis,
where the fourth dynasty pharaohs
ruled about 4500 years ago.
When you go and see the pyramids,
overwhelms you the amount of material,
and the massiveness of each stone, the amount of
labor that these constructions must have required.
If you traveled back to 2500 BC,
the time the pyramids were built,
you would see these huge white masses
shining in the middle of the desert,
for they had a very different
finish from the one we see today.
Pharaohs built the pyramids in their
lifetime as their future tombs to
secure immortality by the preservation
of their mummy, until the time when,
according to their belief, the soul
would once more return to the body.
Egyptian pyramids are square in plan, and their
faces are generally equilateral triangles.
The sides face directly north, south, east,
and west, aligning with the
cycle of Ra, god of the sun.
Most pyramids have their
entrance on their northern side,
which gives access to a passage sloping
downwards to a chamber below the ground.
However, each pyramid varies slightly
on its design and internal distribution.
The Great Pyramids of Giza are three—Cheops,
Chephren, and Mycerinos—each named after the
Pharaoh who commissioned its construction.
The Pyramid of Cheops, the oldest of the three,
is the largest mass of stone ever erected by man.
It was originally 146 meters high, with
each of its faces measuring 230 meters long.
Its faces make an angle of
51 degrees with the ground.
Today it is somewhat smaller
than its original dimensions,
as the white outer casing has disappeared.
This pyramid has three internal
chambers: the subterranean chamber,
the Queen’s Chamber, and the King’s Chamber.
Due to changes of plan during the construction,
the subterranean chamber was a discarded project,
abandoned in favor of placing the burial
chamber higher up inside the pyramid.
As a result, this underground chamber
appears irregular and even unfinished;
its rough walls reflect the fact that it was cut
directly into the bedrock beneath the pyramid.
The Queen’s Chamber, whose
name was given in modern times,
probably contained a large statue of Cheops,
serving as his spirit chamber, called serdab.
The King’s Chamber was built to contain
the granite sarcophagus of the Pharaoh,
which you can still see inside.
You can notice the change in material
that was used for this chamber,
indicating the importance of this room.
It’s all made of red granite, same as
the great beams set above the chamber.
Granite is a much harder stone,
so it helped to transfer the tremendous
weight of the pyramid around the chamber.
If you look closely, you’ll find two
small openings inside the chamber,
which are thought to be ventilation shafts
that lead to the exterior of the building,
although their precise function and
symbolic meaning remain unclear.
The passage leading to this chamber, known as the
Grand Gallery, is itself a marvel of construction.
A corbeled vault rises eight
and a half meters vertically,
creating an impressive corridor that
contrasts with the one-meter-high
corridor you have to go through
before reaching the Grand Gallery.
It can be challenging to go through this corridor,
but upon reaching the Grand Gallery, you
feel the cool air flowing inside the pyramid.
When entering the Great Pyramid, you access
not through the original entrance made by the
Egyptians, but through a tunnel that was excavated
in the Middle Ages by a caliph called Al-Ma’mun.
His men didn’t know where the original
entrance was located because it was sealed,
and much of the pyramid’s surface was still
covered with the original white casing,
but they knew where to look—they knew pyramids
have their entrances on the north side, and
they opened the tunnel in the center, at a height
they assumed would intersect the internal system.
The tunnel was carved using simple tools
available during the medieval period,
which is why you can distinguish the rough, hasty,
and uneven tunnel from the neat, smooth
original passageways of the pyramid.
By chance, their tunnel intersected the Descending
Passage, which leads to the internal chambers.
When they entered, they found the
chambers empty, no treasure and no mummy.
Since the main entrance was still sealed, it is
likely that the pyramid was robbed in antiquity,
shortly after the pyramid was finished,
as people still knew the internal layout,
the location of the hidden mechanisms,
and how sealing systems worked,
so the robbers were most
probably ancient Egyptians.
The second-largest pyramid is that of Chephren,
easily recognizable by its upper section,
which still preserves its original casing,
giving you an idea of the powerful
appearance that these pyramids once had.
The Pyramid of Chephren rose
to a height of 143 meters,
and each side measures 215 meters at the base.
Though smaller in its base, the height
is very close to that of Cheops’ pyramid,
because of its steeper slope of 53 degrees.
If you visit the site you might get the impression
that this is the tallest of the three pyramids,
but that’s because it’s built on a
higher ground than that of Cheops.
For some reason, this pyramid has two northern
entrances, one leading through a subterranean
passageway, and the other through the stonework,
both leading to a single underground tomb chamber.
This pyramid was first opened in
1818 by Italian explorer Giovanni
Battista Belzoni, who found the original entrance.
In the 19th century, the pyramids were much
more stripped from their original casing,
and Belzoni, who knew the entrance
was somewhere in the northern face,
noticed a horizontal gap in the masonry of the
base, with a slightly different stone dressing.
This anomaly marked the entrance corridor.
Belzoni excavated directly into the blockage,
instead of excavating blindly like the
medieval caliph in the other pyramid.
He entered and found the chamber empty,
so this pyramid was likely also robbed very
early, during the Old Kingdom of Egypt.
Belzoni inscribed in the wall “Scoperta da
G. Belzoni 2 mar. 1818” which is Italian
for “discovered by G. Belzoni march 2nd 1818”.
Belzoni found an empty granite
sarcophagus at the end of the chamber,
which has a gabled roof made
with massive limestone beams.
The Pyramid of Mycerinos is considerably
smaller than the other two, and it also
conserves part of its original casing, which,
as you can see, is different from the other two:
this one had a granite casing on the
bottom half, and limestone on the top.
Like the other two, this pyramid was
robbed in antiquity, and the first
documented entry by European explorers
in the 1830s, found the chambers empty.
As in the others, the entrance is on the north
side, and here you enter through the granite
casing, and walk down through a narrow
corridor that’s about thirty meters long.
The pyramids weren’t made for modern
tourists to go up and down all the time,
so it is difficult to navigate.
At the end of the initial descending passage,
you reach a first small chamber that has a
few relief pattern carvings on the walls.
These imitate the vernacular
architecture of an Egyptian house,
as this is probably a room where the
statue of the Pharaoh was located.
As in Cheops’ pyramid, this one
has a system of granite blocks
that would fall on this room to seal the entrance.
After the second small corridor
you reach a larger chamber with
an access to the underground main chamber.
You descend another small
passage and enter the chamber,
which has a granite curved
vault covered in graffiti.
Graffiti inside pyramids was
very common in the 19th century.
Early explorers and travelers
often left their initials on walls.
Mycerinos’ sarcophagus is said to have been
beautifully crafted from black basalt with rich
detail, but unfortunately was taken by the British
and lost in a shipwreck on its way to Britain.
The pyramids were laid out on the bedrock,
which is a solid layer of limestone that
lies underneath the sand of the desert.
This bedrock was leveled to
provide a stable foundation
to receive the weight of the massive structures.
For the most part, local limestone was
used for the construction of the pyramids,
except for the casing, for which
a finer limestone was brought from
the opposite side of the river, and
for the granite, used primarily for
the linings of some of the chambers and
passages as it is a much harder stone.
The granite was transported down the
Nile from Aswan, in the south of Egypt.
So each pyramid had a limestone core,
faced with a finer limestone that was
polished for a smooth white finish
that reflected the rays of the sun.
The apex stone, called Pyramidion,
was probably gilded with an alloy
of gold and silver, although there is
not enough evidence to confirm this.
These capstones were made of finer materials,
because the pyramids were associated with Ra,
the sun, and they were meant to reflect
the sunlight, connecting Earth and Heaven.
The pyramids were not isolated structures, but
rather, they were the main part of a funerary
complex, composed by the tomb proper, which is
the pyramid itself, a mortuary temple, located on
the east of the pyramid at its foot, which served
for veneration and offerings to the dead, a long
causeway, and a Valley Temple, where the corpse
was received for purification and mummification.
A canal was built connecting the
river Nile with the Valley Temple,
by which the funeral procession arrived.
Egyptian architecture is all about the procession.
Procession is the protagonist in Egyptian
architecture, and you can clearly see this
notion of movement governed by the axes in
the way the pyramid complex is laid out.
The causeways are not parallel, and the causeway
repeats the direction of the pyramid
itself only on the Mycerinos complex.
Surrounding the pyramids, a
city of mastabas is disposed.
A mastaba was a type of Egyptian
tomb structure characterized by
its rectangular shape with a
flat roof and sloping sides.
Mastabas typically have a shaft and an underground
chamber for burial, and a small room
for offerings on the ground level.
They are often decorated with inscriptions and
reliefs inside, and a false door carved in the
wall that represents the passageway
into the afterlife for the deceased.
The smaller pyramids were built for
the burial of royal family members,
and the mastabas were for nobles,
priests, and court officials.
They were buried near the pharaoh because
they believed that proximity to him would
ensure a more favorable journey to the afterlife.
Situated in front of the great pyramids,
at the entrance of the complex,
is the great Sphinx of Giza.
Its site used to be a stone quarry,
from where much of the limestone used
for the pyramids’ construction
was extracted, and it was carved
from a natural spur of rock to resemble a
Sphinx with rough masonry added in parts.
An Egyptian Sphinx had the head of a
king or a ram on the body of a lion.
They were often placed at the entrance of temples,
and their role was to protect sacred places.
This Sphinx of Giza bears the face of Chephren,
the Pharaoh who built the second pyramid, wearing
the royal head-dress, the false beard, and cobra
brow ornament—symbols of divinity and kingship.
Between the paws, there is a large granite stele
that records a restoration made to the
Sphinx by Thutmose IV in the 1400s BC.
The Sphinx is about seventy meters long,
and twenty meters high in its highest point.
Its face is four meters wide, and
its mouth is over two meters long.
Although greatly mutilated,
especially in the nose,
it is still a marvel, as it
has been throughout the ages.
It is thought that it was carved
to guard the complex of Chephren,
but much about its construction and date is
still a mystery, and probably ever will be.
If you compare other Ancient Egyptian
funerary complexes, you may notice that
there is a lack of articulation and
decoration in the whole Giza complex.
Take a look at Saqqara for example, possibly
the oldest pyramid complex in Egypt.
Here you have columns articulating surfaces, most
of them decorated with papyrus and lotus capitals,
some of them have fluting imitating
a bundle of reeds from the river,
and you have reliefs, and hieroglyphic
inscriptions on the walls of buildings.
These articulating details and decoration have
been abolished in the Giza complex—you see square,
monolithic pillars and lintels in the Valley
Temples, there is no relief decoration nor
hieroglyphic inscriptions even inside the
pyramids, not even the sarcophagus has a
single inscription, all to strengthen the effect
of the smooth surfaces and pure geometric shapes.
The spaces appear as if they were
excavated within large masses of stone.
The Giza complex represents extreme
simplicity and abstraction—no ornament,
smooth surface, and pure geometric
shapes, and clear orthogonal space,
strengthening the mass, clarity of form,
and the feeling of permanence and eternity.
Even though interior spaces exist, they
feel like they are cut out from solid stone.
The building feels more like a single
mass rather than a collection of rooms.
The pyramid is the expression of massive building,
it’s the peak of Egyptian concern
with durability and eternity.
The impression given to the mind of the spectator,
is that these buildings were erected for eternity.
The remains have a character of immense solidity.
The pyramids are the most extravagant
of all ancient buildings in many ways.
Thanks for watching.
I hope you enjoyed and learned.
Please like this video, subscribe to my
channel, and if you like these videos,
you can watch longer versions of them
if you join as a channel member, there,
I explain a lot more details, more
about the construction of the pyramids,
and more mysterious things about
the Giza complex and other places.
Thank you for watching and I'll see
you very soon in another episode.
Goodbye!